The theory, or idea, of plate tectonics says that Earth’s outer layer is made up of large, moving pieces called plates. All of Earth’s land and water sit on these plates. The plates are made of solid rock. Under the plates is a weaker layer of partially melted rock. The plates are constantly moving over this weaker layer.

As the plates move, they interact at their boundaries in different ways. At one type of boundary the plates slide alongside each other. At another type, the plates crash into each other. In this case the edge of one plate may slide under another plate and be destroyed. Or the two edges of the plates may rise up and form mountains. At the third type of boundary the plates move apart from each other. When they do, the melted rock beneath the plates rises up. This melted rock, or magma, cools as it rises and forms new crust.
Earthquakes and volcanoes often happen along plate boundaries. There are so many earthquakes and volcanoes at the edges of the Pacific Plate that this region is called the Ring of Fire.
The plates have moved across Earth’s surface for hundreds of millions of years. As the plates move, the continents on them move, too. This movement is called continental drift.
Scientists think that it takes about 500 million years for all the continents to join together into one big continent—or supercontinent—and then break apart again. A number of supercontinents have formed and broken apart on Earth over time. The most recent supercontinent, called Pangea, had formed by about 270 million years ago. Pangea lay across a plate boundary. Slowly, Pangea broke apart at this boundary. Rising magma filled in the space, which eventually became the floor of the Atlantic Ocean.
One piece of Pangea included parts of what are now North America, Europe, and Asia. This piece, called Laurasia, drifted north. The other piece of Pangea included parts of what are now Antarctica, Africa, South America, and Australia. This part, called Gondwanaland, drifted south. Eventually Laurasia and Gondwanaland broke apart, too. The continents then slowly moved to the places they are now.
The continents continue to move today. Scientists believe that in about 250 million years they will join together again.

The very black cat must be really meowing really loud in the yard.
